---
layout: post
title:  "A Word on Editions"
date:   2021-03-29 12:21:16 -0500
---

*September 15th, 2021*

It’s the first day of face-to-face class during Fall 2021. A sea of masked students stares at me as I pace along the front of the room. I’m a third of the way through my Syllabus Day monologue when I get to their assigned texts. A bold hand raises to my right. I already know what the student is going to ask as I hold up my Norton Critical 3rd Edition of Jane Eyre. 
	
“Is it ok if we use a different edition?” 
	
Students don’t often realize that even instructors or senior PhD candidates ask themselves the same question. I was confronted with the same question of edition repeatedly throughout my experience writing this dissertation.  I found myself teetering the line drawn between the perfect, respectable, best-for-everything-academic editions and the less renowned, but easily accessible and already digitized editions. The question of which edition a literature scholar selects for their project is a major one and one I struggled with daily. 
	
For starters, poets like Wordsworth and Smith were famous for publishing and republishing their works with only a few minor changes in each edition. Michael Gamer discusses this extensively in “Subscription Reprinting.”  He explains the importance of recognizing different editions of Smith’s poetry because her financial woes had pressured her to publish the same volumes of poetry repeatedly with subtle variations in each. “Beginning with the third edition of Elegiac Sonnets (1786), Smith became increasingly expert in the art of reselling old poems with, and as, new ones, particularly in the years of her popularity as a novelist.”  Each subsequent edition contained different poems, an expanding subscribers list, a new preface, and an elaborated notes and quotes section. He reveals that the fifth edition of Elegiac Sonnets and Other Poems is “transformative” from its prior editions. This edition “takes Smith’s core sequence of thirty-six sonnets and encases them within a protective frame of accumulating prefaces, subscribers, and public and ‘Other Poems.’”

So, I tried to find a digitized, freely available version of this mythical fifth edition. She was nowhere to be found—at least during 2021. Other, perhaps equally reputable, editions might have existed in the bowels of the internet, Florida State University Databases, HathiTrust, or somewhere, but my digitized edition needed to fit specific, functional criteria. I needed a clean facsimile of Smith’s poetry that was free from sloppy marginalia, decaying paper, or frustratingly askew scanned pages. With my limited OCR computational skills, I needed the cleanest edition I could find and that came at the expense of using “the perfect scholarly edition.” I had to say goodbye to the elusive 5th edition and settle for a practical, digital 8th edition. This results in a sticky conundrum brought up by Andrew Stauffer in his most recent work, Book Traces. He “stresse[s] that digital archives are not replacements for the material texts they represent; they are simulations or models.”  Through digitizing and cleaning these texts, I lose the components of the original, physical texts that make each volume unique. 
   
  Indeed, I actually stripped away all of the physical features a book historian might value. I ran the texts through an OCR reader, and then ultimately had to build my own digital editions from the ones I initially downloaded. This Frankenstein-esque construction and reassembly of digitized poems further transforms the texts beyond their original shape. I removed titles, page numbers, footnotes/endnotes, section headers, punctuation--essentially everything that wasn’t a part of the poem proper. In the end, my corpus was comprised as a “bag of words,” as one professor fondly termed it, without the recognizable structures and features of a collection of poetry. In the end, I exchanged functionality over preservation of the original text, which might make other scholars uncomfortable, or even appalled. 

This is a valid and concerning point that brings me back to my student’s original question. When I responded to my student’s common question, I shrugged and said: “No, it doesn’t really matter.” What I should have told her was that as long as we are aware of the differences between editions—both physical and digitized—, then working with a less reputable one should be permissible. In the end. I used digital editions of Elegiac Sonnets and Other Poems, Vol. 1 (1797) 8th edition, Elegiac Sonnets and Other Poems, Vol. 2 (1797) 8th edition, and Beachy Head: with other poems (1807) second edition, and The Emigrants: a poem, in two books (1793) from HathiTrust. Even though these editions were the most functional for my purposes, I acknowledge that they are not perfect, but—at least—they work for my purposes.  
  

