---
layout: post
title:  "On Finding and (NOT) Fixing Mistakes"
date:   2021-05-13 12:21:16 -0500
---
*May 20, 2021*

No matter how much time I spend “cleaning” my plaintext files, I always find an errant number (66, for some reason keeps cropping up in my Smith corpus), a series of words incorrectly “stemmed” (cottages/cottage has turned to “cottag”), or—even worse—I accidentally removed the line breaks in an entire corpus, which is pretty important to keep for poetry. Each time I think I’ve found a solution or cleaned up the last of them, something else mars my data. I’ve worked until my eyes have glazed over and the black words on the screen look more like hieroglyphics than English. More often than not, my need to fix my data to look pristine and worthy of true DH scholarship results in more hideous human errors. There comes a time when I must forfeit my cleaning battle and let my corpus just be imperfect. That time is now. 

This is another frightening, but relieving revelation that I’ve had over the course of this dissertation (the first being the realization that I couldn’t feasibly finish my diss during a pandemic while caring for my home-hospice-bound grandfather back in the fall of 2020, but that’s another story). My dissertation, despite what I will have to tell my supervisory committee, and prospective employers, is going to be flawed, imperfect, and incomplete. Despite these pretensions to perfection, I nor any other DH scholar (or any scholar really) should feel the pressure to produce revolutionary, insightful, ground-breaking work. This may seem oxymoronic to the entire basis of writing a dissertation, but I believe this glamour of the all-knowing, perfectly complete DH project titers dangerously on the precipice of false objectivity. 

As Katherine Bode explains in “Literary Studies in the Digital Age” from Reading by Numbers, there is a danger for distant readers who falsely claim objectivity, oversimplify language, and hold a biased neoliberal ideology.   Bode indicates that if good methodology and researcher transparency is used, then these issues can be avoided. As a discipline, literary studies need to acknowledge that numbers are a knowledge system that functions similarly to language and we as a field should be embracing this imperfect system as it offers new ways to interact and understand our discipline. And, by extension, this acknowledgement of an imperfect system needs to be extended to the researcher herself. Mistakes will be made, and the researcher should not be compelled to sweep them under the digital rug in pursuit of an all-knowing, digital wunderkind academic persona. 

Instead, we should simply own up to the possible errors and the methods of tidying our data to make it more readable. For example, you may see that my data has issues with stemming words like “univers” instead of “universe” or “universes.” To recognize this error and also help readers navigate a slightly less messy data list, readers can tell when I’ve altered phasing with [brackets]. So, I’ve relabeled “univers” to “univers[e/es]” to clarify the issue with stemming. In an ideal world, I wish I could have fixed small issues like this and I could potentially do so if I had a TA army at my disposal and more time, but I do not. There are errors in traditional dissertations and at some point, I must accept that nothing will get done if I focus on minor issues that minimally impact my data. To paraphrase a former professor of mine, “You’ll always find typos after publishing your manuscript.” So why is this any different for a student working with data? I’ve come to accept these typos, errors, mistakes, etc. as “imperfections” because, like my dissertation, I am made up of flaws, but that doesn’t mean what I have to say is any less important.  
