---
layout: post
title:  "Exercise 2"
date:   2021-02-26 12:21:16 -0500
categories: jekyll update
---
# Work Log

    - Friday, 1/15 10:00am-11:00am; identified corpus, downloaded facsimiles of texts.
    - Monday, 1/18 8:00am-10:00am; Experimented with Google OCR.
    - Tuesday, 1/19 8:30am-9:30am; Created excel doc containing metadata; finished creating plain text files.

# Exercise Description

I located an eighth edition Elegiac Sonnets and Other Poems, volume 1 (1779), a second edition of Elegiac Sonnets, and Other Poems, volume 2 (1800), and a first edition of Beachy Head: with other poems (1807) from HathiTrust. I would have liked to have all first editions but the facsimiles for many of the older editions (particularly volume one of Elegiac Sonnets) were quite poor. I saved these original facsimiles and then prepared to process them into plaintext formatting through OCR readers.

# OCR Processing and Light Cleaning

I uploaded PDF versions of my corpus to Google Docs to try out the platform’s OCR and then downloaded the plaintext file versions of my corpus to SublimeText. I also did some light cleaning using Regrex101 because I wanted to practice the skills learned from last week while they were fresh in my head. I cleaned up errant punctuation (/[[:punct:]]), and tighten up general formatting. I think I figured out how to get rid of the long s. I used /[?]/gm with the function “substitution” to replace the long s symbol [?] with a traditional s and it seemed to work well.

# Corpus Characteristics

The corpus contains three volumes of poetry by Charlotte Smith. Although I did some light cleaning, the plain text is quite messy and has frequent line breaks and errant symbols. I hope to calculate word frequencies from the project to consider the importance of sound language in her poetry. I don’t expect to see an extraordinarily high level of sound words in Smith’s corpus, but I am interested in performing a cluster analysis on the texts to see how sound words relate to other topics in her works.